SECTION: Tutorial Overview - Writing Your First Django App, Part 1
PURPOSE:
This section introduces the tutorial by describing the basic poll application that will be built, consisting of a public site for viewing and voting on polls and an admin site for managing polls.
The application has two parts:

A public site that lets people view polls and vote in them.
An admin site that lets you add, change, and delete polls.

SECTION: Django Installation Verification
CONCEPT:
Verify that Django is installed and identify the installed version.
COMMAND:
python -m django --version
If Django is installed, the command displays the version. If not installed, an error "No module named django" appears.
VERSION AND SCOPE ANCHORS:
DJANGO VERSION: 6.0
PYTHON VERSION: 3.12 and later
APPLICABILITY:

This tutorial targets Django 6.0
Compatible with Python 3.12 and newer versions

SECTION: Creating a Django Project
CONCEPT:
A Django project is a collection of settings for an instance of Django, including database configuration, Django-specific options, and application-specific settings. Use the django-admin tool to generate the initial project structure.
COMMAND:
django-admin startproject mysite djangotutorial
This command creates a directory named djangotutorial containing the mysite project. The outer directory name is arbitrary and can be renamed.
USAGE GUIDELINES:
DO NOT USE WHEN:

Naming the project after built-in Python or Django components (e.g., django or test), as this causes conflicts.

SECTION: Django Project Structure
CONCEPT:
The startproject command generates a standard directory and file layout for a Django project.
Directory structure:
textdjangotutorial/
    manage.py
    mysite/
        __init__.py
        settings.py
        urls.py
        asgi.py
        wsgi.py
FILE: manage.py
ROLE: Command-line utility for interacting with the Django project in various ways.
FILE: mysite/
ROLE: Python package containing the project code; used as the import base (e.g., mysite.urls).
FILE: mysite/init.py
ROLE: Empty file that marks the directory as a Python package.
FILE: mysite/settings.py
ROLE: Contains configuration and settings for the Django project.
FILE: mysite/urls.py
ROLE: Defines URL declarations for the project; acts as the table of contents for site URLs.
FILE: mysite/asgi.py
ROLE: Entry point for ASGI-compatible web servers to serve the project.
FILE: mysite/wsgi.py
ROLE: Entry point for WSGI-compatible web servers to serve the project.
SECTION: Running the Development Server
CONCEPT:
The Django development server is a lightweight, Python-based web server for local development and testing.
COMMAND:
python manage.py runserver
This starts the server at http://127.0.0.1:8000/. Visiting this address in a browser displays a congratulations page confirming successful setup.
Ignore warnings about unapplied migrations at this stage.
USAGE GUIDELINES:
DO NOT USE WHEN:

Deploying to production; use a production-grade WSGI or ASGI server instead.

CONCEPT:
The development server automatically reloads code on changes for most modifications. Adding new files may require manual restart.
SUMMARY:

Development server enables rapid local testing
Not suitable for production environments
Auto-reloading supports efficient development workflow

SECTION: Project vs App Distinction
CONCEPT:
A Django app is a self-contained web application that performs a specific function (e.g., a poll system). A project is a collection of configuration and multiple apps for a complete website. Apps are reusable across projects.
SECTION: Creating a Django App
CONCEPT:
Use the startapp management command to generate the standard directory structure for a new app.
COMMAND:
python manage.py startapp polls
Run this command from the directory containing manage.py.
Directory structure created:
textpolls/
    __init__.py
    admin.py
    apps.py
    migrations/
        __init__.py
    models.py
    tests.py
    views.py
This structure houses the poll application code.
SECTION: Writing a Basic View
CONCEPT:
A view is a Python function that handles a web request and returns a response.
Code for the first view (polls/views.py):
Pythonfrom django.http import HttpResponse

def index(request):
    return HttpResponse("Hello, world. You're at the polls index.")
SECTION: Defining App URL Configuration
CONCEPT:
Each app can have its own URLconf in a file named urls.py to map URLs to views.
Code for polls/urls.py:
from django.urls import path

from . import views

urlpatterns = [
    path("", views.index, name="index"),
]
Updated polls directory structure includes urls.py.
SECTION: Including App URLs in Project URLconf
CONCEPT:
Connect the app's URLconf to the project's root URLconf using include().
Code for mysite/urls.py:
from django.contrib import admin
from django.urls import include, path

urlpatterns = [
    path("polls/", include("polls.urls")),
    path("admin/", admin.site.urls),
]
The include() function enables modular, reusable URL patterns by delegating matching URL segments to the included URLconf.
USAGE GUIDELINES:
USE WHEN:

Including other URL patterns from apps or modules.

DO NOT USE WHEN:

Directly including admin.site.urls (this is the standard exception).

SECTION: Testing the View
COMMAND:
python manage.py runserver
Visit http://localhost:8000/polls/ in a browser to see the response "Hello, world. You're at the polls index."
Ensure the URL includes /polls/ to match the configured path.