SECTION: OVERVIEW: PURPOSE:
Explain what Django’s authentication system is and what components it provides.

CONCEPT:
Django includes a built-in user authentication system.
It manages user accounts, groups, permissions, and cookie-based user sessions.
The default implementation works out of the box and can be extended and customized to meet project-specific requirements.

The Django authentication system covers both authentication and authorization.
Authentication verifies that a user is who they claim to be.
Authorization determines what an authenticated user is allowed to do.
In the context of this documentation, the term authentication refers to both authentication and authorization tasks.

The authentication system consists of the following core components:

Users

Permissions: Binary yes/no flags that designate whether a user may perform a specific task.

Groups: A mechanism for applying labels and permissions to multiple users at once.

A configurable password hashing system

Forms and view tools for logging in users or restricting access to content

A pluggable backend system

The authentication system is intentionally generic.
It does not implement some features that are common in other web authentication systems.
Common missing features that are often implemented via third-party packages include:

Password strength checking

Throttling of login attempts

Authentication against third-party providers such as OAuth

Object-level permissions

USAGE GUIDELINES:
USE WHEN:

You need built-in handling of users, permissions, groups, and sessions.

You require a configurable and extensible authentication and authorization framework.

You want to leverage Django’s password hashing, login forms, and authentication backends.

DO NOT USE WHEN:

You require features such as password strength enforcement, login throttling, third-party authentication, or object-level permissions without adding third-party packages.

You need a non-cookie-based session mechanism that diverges significantly from Django’s session framework.

SUMMARY:
Django provides a built-in system for authentication and authorization.

Core components include users, groups, permissions, sessions, password hashing, and pluggable backends.

The system is generic and omits some advanced features.

Missing features are typically added through third-party packages.

SECTION: INSTALLATION: PURPOSE:
Describe how to enable and initialize Django’s authentication system in a project.

CONCEPT:
Authentication support is provided as a Django contrib module in django.contrib.auth.
By default, new Django projects include the configuration needed for authentication in the settings.py file created by the django-admin startproject command.

The authentication system requires the following entries in the INSTALLED_APPS setting:

'django.contrib.auth': Provides the core authentication framework and its default models.

'django.contrib.contenttypes': Provides the content type system, which allows you to associate permissions with models that you define.

The authentication system also requires the following middleware in the MIDDLEWARE setting:

SessionMiddleware: Manages sessions across HTTP requests.

AuthenticationMiddleware: Associates users with incoming requests by using session data.

With these settings in place, migrating the database creates the necessary tables for authentication-related models and the permissions for any models in installed apps.

COMMAND:
Run the database migrations to create authentication tables and permissions:

CODE:
manage.py migrate
USAGE GUIDELINES:
USE WHEN:

You are setting up a new Django project and want to use the built-in authentication system.

You have added or confirmed django.contrib.auth, django.contrib.contenttypes, SessionMiddleware, and AuthenticationMiddleware in settings.

You are initializing or updating the database schema to include auth-related models and permissions.

DO NOT USE WHEN:

You have custom authentication storage that does not rely on Django’s models or migrations.

You are not using Django’s ORM or have removed django.contrib.auth or django.contrib.contenttypes from INSTALLED_APPS.

VERSION AND SCOPE:
DJANGO VERSION: 6.0
PYTHON VERSION: Not specified in this document
APPLICABILITY: Applies to Django projects that use the built-in authentication framework and the standard Django settings and middleware configuration.

SUMMARY:
Authentication is provided via django.contrib.auth and depends on django.contrib.contenttypes.

SessionMiddleware and AuthenticationMiddleware must be enabled.

Running python manage.py migrate creates auth-related tables and permissions.

The instructions apply to Django 6.0 and the default project layout.

SECTION: USAGE ENTRY POINTS: PURPOSE:
List primary documentation areas related to using and customizing the authentication system.

CONCEPT:
Django’s authentication system exposes several major usage areas:

Using Django’s default authentication implementation

Working with User objects

Managing permissions and authorization

Handling authentication in web requests

Managing users through the Django admin interface

Customizing user models and authentication behavior

Managing passwords in Django

These topics cover day-to-day use of authentication, configuration of access control, and customization of the underlying user model and authentication backends.

USAGE GUIDELINES:
USE WHEN:

You need to implement authentication flows using Django’s default tools.

You work directly with user accounts, permissions, or authorization logic.

You customize user models or authentication to match application requirements.

You configure password storage and password reset behaviors.

DO NOT USE WHEN:

You require only static, non-authenticated content.

You are delegating all authentication to an external system without integrating Django’s auth features.

SUMMARY:
The authentication system supports default usage, admin integration, and request-based authentication.
It provides APIs for users, permissions, and authorization.
It is customizable at the user model and backend level.
Password management is a distinct part of the authentication system.